Hey, everybody.
Welcome to "Mind Shift."
In this episode, we are
discussing that power of women
to change the world with
the extraordinary performer,
writer and activist Eve Ensler,
and the incredibly precocious
Islamic feminist Jerin Arifa.
Eve recently won
a harrowing battle
against cancer, described
in her latest book,
"In the Body of the World."
At the same time, she has
helped women in the Congo
to overcome a situation
of tremendous oppression,
and build a new
school, City of Hope.
She's extraordinarily inspiring,
and it's a great pleasure
to speak with her.
[THEME MUSIC]
There is something precious,
and something worth living,
and living for, and we are
here today to share that,
and to figure that out, and to
find out what it means to use
the time that we
have in the body
that we have to the
best of our abilities
to understand each other.
[APPLAUSE]
-Hey, everybody.
Welcome to "Mind Shift."
This is Daniel Pinchbeck.
Our first guest this week
is the amazing activist,
playwright, creator of "The
Vagina Monologues," Eve Ensler.
Thank you so much
for joining us.
NARRATOR: Author of
"The Vagina Monologues,"
Eve Ensler is an American
playwright, performer,
feminist, and activist.
Her current book, "In
the Body of the World,"
has been regarded
as an unforgettable,
raw, and powerful story of by
the New York Times Book Review.
She is the creator of V-Day,
a global activist movement
to stop violence against women.
The movement to date has
raised over $80 million,
and has funded over 12,000
community-based anti-violence
programs and safe houses
in the Congo, Haiti, Kenya,
South Dakota, Egypt,
and Iraq, providing
women sanctuary from
abuse, genital mutilation,
and honor killing.
She was born in New
York City, and in 1999,
was awarded the
Guggenheim Fellowship
Award in playwriting.
[APPLAUSE]
-Hey, Eve.
-Hi.
Thank you so much for
joining us on "Mind Shift."
-Thrilled to be here.
-I really appreciate it.
Thank you.
And yeah, maybe just
tell us a little
about your recent
trajectory, your new book,
and the work you're doing
with One Billion Rising.
OK.
Well, I'm really
happy to be here.
I think this show's awesome,
and it's a really great idea.
Well, "In the Body of
the World" is a memoir,
and it's kind of
based on a combination
of factors and inspirations.
One was cancer.
I had stage three/four
uterine cancer.
And that compelled
me or propelled me
into a whole new
trajectory, both in my body,
and coming into my body.
Because I went through a huge
kind of apocalypse in my body.
You know, I--
I mean, it sounded
like that from the book.
it sounded very extreme.
It was very, very extreme.
And through the process of
all that happening, what
began to happen
is I begin to have
this very transformative
experience that's
kind of taken me by surprise.
And it really began
with the diagnosis,
and shot me into this
state of-- I was on my way
to Haiti to do work
in Haiti, and I
suddenly heard, you
have stage four cancer,
stage three cancer.
And three days, I was
in nine hour surgery,
and all kinds of
organs were removed.
But I think what was amazing
about the whole experience is
that for so much of my life,
I had been searching for a way
back into my body.
I think, for many of us who
have been traumatized when we're
younger, or were abused,
or sexually attacked,
or whatever-- I think all
of us are traumatized.
I don't think there's anyone
on the planet who's not
traumatized, but I think some
people have secondary trauma,
and some people
have primary trauma.
And I had survived both
rape and enormous violence
from my own father.
And I think at a very
young age, I left my body.
It was just too
terrible place, and too
terrifying a place to inhabit.
And as a result of that,
I left or lost connection
with the Earth, with just
the basis of existence,
and was floating
for a long time.
And I think what happened
when I was diagnosed
and went through this
surgery is I landed.
I woke up, and I was in my body.
I had tubes coming
out of every port.
I had ports.
I had catheters.
I had machines.
And it was the first
time I was ever in here.
And that began this incredible--
which I can only describe
as a mystical experience
of beginning to land more,
and more, and more inside my
body, which was landing me more
and more inside the Earth,
and more and more connected
to everything around me.
And by the time I got to chemo,
which was down the journey
after infections
and operations, I
was really terrified of
chemo, the idea of putting
poison into my bloodstream.
I don't know.
It just felt claustrophobic.
It felt end of the world.
And I had this brilliant
therapist who's
really a visionary person.
And she just showed up one day.
I notice one chapter you talked
about imagining all the reasons
why you might have
gotten this cancer, as
if there was some reason
for this to have happened.
Yeah.
I mean, was that something
that you have to go through,
sort of feeling like a victim
or some kind of process
had been inflicted
on you in some way?
Well, I think when you're
diagnosed with cancer,
you just think, well,
why do I have this?
I mean, and obviously a lot's
to do with the environment,
and what we've done to the
environment, and the conditions
of poisoning that we've done.
But I think there's
also so many factors.
Was it Tab that I drank?
Was it cigarettes?
Was it having a violent father?
I mean, I think you just try
to process every possibility.
But I think what
I came to is it's
probably all those things and
none of those things, you know?
But one of the things
that happened in chemo
was that this therapist came,
and she basically gave me
a frame for the whole
experience, which was she said
to me, I want you to imagine
that when the poison's entering
your body that it's
gonna burn away
everything that needs to go.
And you're just gonna
burn away your past,
and you're gonna
burn away any sense
of victimhood you've ever had.
And you're gonna
burn away the rapist.
Because for many,
many years of my life,
I've been listening to
the stories of women
around the planet through V-Day,
the global movement, who've
been raped, and
who've been abused.
And I think I was
holding a lot of stories
in my body, which kind of
made a tumor eventually.
I'm thinking about there's
this guy called Gabor Mate.
Have you heard about him?
-No.
He's a psychiatrist
in Vancouver.
He spoke at this conference
I was at about healing.
And he basically, he's done
a lot of work with Ayahuasca
also, and ends up with the
theory that a lot of what
happens to us
physically is based
on things like
story, and narrative,
or emotions that get
stored in the body.
So he talking--
-Oh, he has a book on trauma.
Yeah, exactly.
I did meet him at Democracy
Now a few months ago, yes.
Exactly.
So he talked about,
for instance,
how he thinks that
breast cancer is
often caused from repressed
anger that women feel.
I think there is
no doubt about it,
a direct connection
between trauma and disease,
and particularly reproductive
cancers and sexual abuse.
And I think years from now,
we'll call cancer trauma.
We'll be treating it in
very, very similar ways.
Because my whole experience
was the more I dealt
with my trauma, and the
more I processed it,
and the more I released
it, the better I got.
Now, that's not to say
it's the cure for cancer,
but I know that there
is a direct correlation
between me getting sick and
me having unprocessed trauma.
I've spent my life now
traveling and spending
years with women
who've been abused,
and women particularly
on the front lines,
for example, who hear
stories about rape.
Last year, I know four
women who got cancer, who
are doing that kind of work.
And I think where does
all that go in our bodies?
Where does it go?
It goes into our cells.
It becomes something else.
And without a way
of talking about it,
and processing it, and releasing
it, it becomes a disease.
And particularly in the book,
you talked about the experience
in the Congo.
Can you share a little bit?
I'm not sure everybody's
aware of what's happened
in the Congo, and
also how it relates
to the West's infatuation with
technology and so on, also.
Well, seven years
ago, I was invited
to the Democratic
Republic of Congo
by an extraordinary man
named Dr. Denis Mukwege, who
is one of the noblest,
grandest people on the planet,
and he's a surgeon and
a doctor at the Panzi
Hospital in Bukavu, DRC.
And he's been doing some amazing
work, very, very painful work
on sewing up women in their
vaginas and their parts
in the DRC, who are
being massively raped
in a conflict that
has been raging
for the last eight years--
I'm sorry, the last 13 years.
I think we're talking about 8
million people who have died.
It's estimated that hundreds
and thousands of women
have been raped, but I think
in the end it will be millions.
And when I went there, I
had been traveling the world
for many years supporting
women who are survivors,
but I'd never seen anything
like what was going on there.
And the war in Congo is
propelled by natural resources,
coltan, which goes
into our cellphones
and PlayStations, copper, tin.
It is a place that has
been plummeted by the world
and plundered for years under
King Leopold, originally,
and his colonialist regime.
Originally, we created
even the borders
of these different countries
to allow for the extraction
of resources and so on.
Exactly.
And now the way it works
is that militias are hired
by proxy groups, and
corporate groups,
and governments that
go into villages.
And one of their primary
methods now is mass rape.
Because it's cheap, and it's
immediate, and it's effective.
And if you rape the
women in a family,
or have the husbands
rape their daughters,
or the brothers
rape their sisters,
you destroy the
family structure.
The family's forced to flee.
The villagers flee,and
you take over the mines.
And it's been a horrific,
horrific tactic.
And thousands and thousands
of women have been raped,
and I'm talking
about brutally raped.
Raped in ways that, when
I first went to the Congo,
to be honest with
you, I was shattered.
I stopped sleeping for years.
I'm just beginning to sleep now.
But my story became
very interwoven
with the women of Congo,
because when I went there,
I made a commitment that V-Day,
movement, would be with them
until the violence stops.
And we were in the process
of building this place called
the City of Joy, which I'm very
happy to say is running now
and open.
But it was a place
for women survivors.
It's a revolutionary center.
It's a laboratory of love.
It's really a completely new
concept, where 90 women come
for six months,
and they are healed
through therapeutic love,
through dance, through theater,
through all kinds of
healing, through massage,
through talk, through touch.
And then they are trained,
and built, and educated
to become leaders, who then
return to their communities
and pass on and lift
up their communities.
I mean, that sounds so
incredibly important,
but then I wonder also if more
like the social and structural
aspects of the situation
aren't changed,
how will that violence not
keep being perpetuated?
Well, the answer
to that question is,
until the structural
changes happen, it won't.
But how are we gonna
change the structure?
I mean, we waited for years for
the international community,
and the governments, and
the leaders of the world
to stop supporting, for
example, this country, US,
to stop supporting
Rwanda, which is
very much responsible for a lot
of the M23s and the militias
there.
It's not happening because
the interests are too great.
I, myself, believe in building
grassroots revolutions,
and grassroots
forces and energies
that can begin to
build, and amass
power, and take things over.
And I think if we keep
going, in five years,
we'll have 1,000 women who
are trained and revolutionary,
who will begin to have impact
on that country and the world.
I've tried every tactic.
Do you know, I've
been at the UN.
I've been at the governments.
I've been at Downing Street.
I've been at the White House.
But where there feels like
there's a yes energetically
is supporting women who can
drive the future of the Congo.
And we're seeing
incredible results now
in women who are
graduating and going back
to their communities, and really
overhauling the whole culture,
questioning values, questioning
tradition, demanding rights,
standing up, and
started cooperatives,
where they're
feeding their sisters
and building communities.
And I have a lot
of faith in women.
I have a lot of faith in women.
You basically just began as an
artist, a performance artist,
and so on, a playwright.
Did you anticipate moving
into social movement
organizing or social
movement building in a way?
You know, I think I've always
been a political activist,
and an artist.
And it was always a
hard life to live weave
together when I was younger.
Because I think, as a writer,
you don't wanna be didactic,
and you wanna allow
your characters
to speak, and have
a point of view
that's not yours, but theirs.
I think with "The
Vagina Monologues"
it was the first
time where I realized
the worlds could come together.
I could write a play that
was funny, and disturbing,
and outrageous,
and what happened
was, after I started
performing it,
women would line up after
the show every night.
And I thought, great.
They're gonna tell me
about their orgasms,
and what wonderful
sex lives they have,
and this is gonna be amazing.
And in fact, women
lined up to tell me
how they'd been beaten,
and raped, and gang-raped,
and abused, and incested.
And I almost had a break down,
because I felt like I was being
privy to secrets that they
had never told anyone,
and they didn't know
what to do with them.
And I think it was shortly after
that I called a group of women
together in my living
room, because I think
all things begin in
small rooms like this,
where you start the
vision of a new world.
And I said, I have this play.
How could we use it
to stop violence?
And we came up with
V-Day, which was
Vagina Day, Valentine's Day.
And we did one performance
of "The Vagina Monologues"
in New York with all
these amazing performers,
from Whoopie Goldberg
to Lily Tomlin
to Susan Sarandon
and Glenn Close.
And it was like the
theater blew off.
The roof of the
And that was 16 years ago.
And that has just
spread like wildfire.
And now V-Day, it's
16 years later.
We've raised $100 million.
That has all gone to local
grassroots groups that work
to stop violence against women.
And last year, we were able to
birth One Billion Rising, which
was the biggest-- I
think, it probably
is the biggest
mass global action
that's ever happened on
the planet, where a billion
people rose, and danced, and
did outrageous creative acts
on February 14th last year.
And One Billion
Rising was particularly
an uprising or public outcry
against sexual violence.
And I think what was really
thrilling about it, because it
happened in 207
countries, is there
was enormous intersectionality.
We saw in the Philippines,
for example, the people who
were protesting, who
were anti-imperialist
and against militarization
of bases, which
is causing sexual
violence, join forces
with the anti-violence people.
We saw all over the
world, economic inequality
and injustice being joined with
anti-violence against women.
And I think, same with
anti-environmental actions,
groups that are working to stop
environmental injustice are
now joining forces with violence
against women activists.
And I think, to me, that's
the most exciting thing,
because we're actually building
a much broader-based movement,
understanding that all these
things are interconnected.
Like, you can't stop
violence against women
without looking at
poverty, or racism,
or environmental injustice,
or economic injustice.
They're all connected.
I know you have another event
coming up in February 2014.
If anybody in our audience
wants to get involved with it,
what's required of them?
What do they have to do?
Well, you just
have to decide you
want to rise on February 14th.
It's One Billion
Rising for Justice.
I think it was the feeling
of a lot of our coordinators
around the world that
justice is a major theme,
and it seems to me that
justice, to some degree,
makes more sense talking
about than democracy,
because the word democracy
has been so polluted
in so many ways, and corrupted.
But I think we all can
get behind justice.
It's very clear.
And for many women across the
planet, who have been either
in wars like World War II, where
the comfort women, for example,
all throughout Asia were
taken by the Japanese
and held as sex slaves for
months, and months, and months,
they've been waiting for
50 years for justice,
for just the Japanese
government to say we're sorry,
and we're going to
make reparations.
You know, I've been in Bosnia.
I have been in Kosovo.
I have been in every
country in the world,
where people are
waiting for justice,
women are waiting for justice.
And I think until we begin
to look at a justice that
is a transformative justice, a
justice that doesn't just build
more prisons, and
incarcerate more people,
and lock up the
poor, but a justice
that is really looking at root
causes-- why are so many men
raping women?
Why are so many men
creating violence?
What's going on?
And so what is
that reason then?
I mean, how does the
culture of masculinity
have to be reformed,
or what needs
to take place in your opinion?
Well, I think everything about
the culture of masculinity
has to be reformed.
You know, I think the
basis of masculinity
has to do with overpowering,
and domination, and occupation.
And it's the patriarchy.
It's based on the father, right?
It's based on principles where
men need to be in charge,
and men need to
dominate, and men
insert their will on others.
And I think one of moving
things I saw with One Billion
Rising is how many men were
part of that global action,
and how many men are asserting
a different kind of masculinity
that isn't about terrorizing
and isn't about domination,
but is about tenderness, and
it's about vulnerability,
and it's about connection.
And I think the
tyranny of patriarchy
has impacted men in some ways
far worse than it has women.
It's made men divorce
themselves from their heart,
and divorce themselves
from their tears,
and divorce themselves from
questioning, and mystery,
and not knowing,
and forcing them
to know answers to questions
or pretend they do to answers
they don't have.
And so I think a big
part of the movement
now it is the
engagement of men, and
working with men as our allies.
We were talking before,
before we began the interview,
around the work of
Terrence McKenna,
and I was kind of surprised,
because it seemed so different
than your normal
concerns, but you
were saying that you've
been finding a lot
of inspiration in his ideas.
Terrence was a
psychedelic philosopher
who talked about mushrooms, the
origin of human consciousness,
and the idea of a
kind of eschaton
or a kind of redemptive
transformation
of human society.
I'm just curious how
that interests you,
and maybe how that becomes
part of this new paradigm
or new masculine
construct in a way.
Well, I think- I'm
actually obsessed right
now with Terrence McKenna.
-It's his voice.
His voice is just--
He's just incredible,
and I think there's so
many pieces to what
he's talking about,
but one thing is this whole
idea of cultural engineers.
I've always been highly suspect
of the culture, the celebrity
culture and a culture
which has hierarchy,
and where 1% of
the people matter,
and the rest of the
people don't matter,
and they just watch the lives
of celebrities and drool,
and feel bad, and
hate them, and wanna
destroy them, because they
don't have what they have.
And I came back--
You don't think that's healthy?
No, somehow, I don't.
And I came back from Congo,
and I'd been there a month,
and Congo's just such a--
it's a mind explosion on so
many levels, because
it's desperately
poor, and desperately
chaotic, and anarchic,
but it's also the most beautiful
and most loving people.
And so whenever I come back,
I'm just flooded for days.
I don't how to
really adjust to come
back to New York, particularly.
And I was thinking--
I don't know.
I think the reason Terrence is
really speaking to me lately
is I started to watch some TV
shows that were happening here,
and I just got so freaked out.
Every show just
seemed so cynical,
and the worse of
people, and celebrating
the worst of people, and
this ongoing cynicism.
And I think what
Terrence-- I just
love what he says, just unplug.
Like, refuse it.
Don't watch it.
Well, he also says culture
is your operating system.
Absolutely, but he also
says, it's not your friend.
It's your enemy, and
create your own culture.
Go out.
Like, that's why
I love this show.
Go out, and make
something that's
coming from your own heart,
and your own artistry,
and your own self, and
trust your small community.
Trust the smallness
of the community,
that there'll be many other
small communities that
will begin to create something.
And I think One Billion
Rising has really taught
me that if you give people--
I mean, you don't think
we're gonna give Johnny Carson
a run for his money here?
-You know what?
I actually do, but I think it
will come in a different kind
of way, hopefully, that it
won't be based on people selling
while you're talking, and it
won't be based on transactions,
but it will be based
on transformation.
Let's just talk about this idea
of cultural engineering for one
second, and then we're
gonna take a little break
and come back with
you and another guest.
Well, you know, everything
I've ever done in my life
that I've been happy
about has been accidental.
You know, it's come
from curiosity.
It's come from-- like, I was
really interested in vaginas,
so I started to
write about vaginas.
I had no desire to do
a play about vaginas.
It was just, like, wow.
Women were telling incredible
stories about their vaginas,
and I was just
writing them down.
And then it started to
grow into something.
Now, people told
me when I began,
no one will ever
come to this play.
Change the title.
I kept saying, what
am I gonna call it?
The Pocketbook Monologues?
I mean, it's about vaginas.
It's not gonna be like one
of those gotcha things.
You get in the theater,
and it's like gotcha!
It's vaginas!
But one of the things I
discovered along the way
is that when you do that thing
that you're most interested in,
and it is really
connected to some part
of your being and
your soul, it actually
resonates with other people.
If you told me when I started
the "The Vagina Monologues"
20 years ago that it
would be in 50 languages,
that it would've been
formed in 207 countries,
tha-- I've seen it
done in Pakistan.
I've seen it in China.
It's been done everywhere.
Why did that happen?
There's some phenomena aspect
to it that is way beyond me.
But it has to do with curiosity,
and following a desire
to know something,
and just going
with that, as opposed to
editing it, or challenging it.
And it was the same thing
with One Billion Rising.
I was like, look, there are one
billion women on the planet,
one out of three, who
have been raped or beaten,
one billion women on the planet.
One billion!
What is a billion?
I kept thinking, like,
what is a billion?
I would lie in bed at night.
And then one day I said,
well, what if we just invited
a billion people to dance?
Just to dance, and to say,
I'm releasing the shackles.
I'm gonna go on the streets.
I'm gonna go in my church.
I'm gonna go in my mosque.
I'm gonna go everywhere
in the world,
and just release these
shackles of bondage, of rape,
and torture.
And you know what?
It happened.
Now, I have no idea
how it happened.
You can say the internet, but
that's not how it happened.
It happened because I
listened to an instinct,
then other people
listened to an instinct.
They took it.
They made it theirs.
Everybody made it theirs, and
it just flew around the world.
And I think the
cultural engineers don't
want that to happen, right?
They have us hooked into a
system of buy-sell cynicism,
buy-sell cynicism.
It's all bad.
You can't change anything.
You won't ever change the world.
If you believe you
can change the world,
you're somehow treated as
less than, and not cool,
and outside.
I can't even tell you how many
snarky things have been said
about my life, or me,
because I actually believe
we can make the world better.
And that's just part of that
same cultural engineering
that keeps everybody depressed.
I mean, what did I
read the other day?
That more people are
depressed in America?
It will be the second
disability in five years.
Depression?
I mean, that's how many
people are depressed
in this country of plenty?
So I think part of it is,
how do you unplug from that,
and begin to listen to your own
voice, and your own instincts,
and your own wisdom, and
start creating based on that
without approval, and
without seeking approval
from those cultural engineers?
-Awesome.
Well, listen, thank you so much.
We're gonna have you back in a
few minutes with another guest.
It's so wonderful
to talk to you,
and it's amazing
work you're doing.
[APPLAUSE]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
NARRATOR: Jerin Arifa is the
chair of the national and New
York state Young Feminists
Task Forces for NOW, National
Organization for Women.
The organization helps
bring young women, men,
and non-gender
conforming individuals
into feminist activism with
hopes of giving a greater
voice to young feminists.
NOW aims to work with
their allies of all ages
to foster an
intergenerational exchange.
She has had works published
in the "Huffington Post"
on how Islamophobia encourages
violence against women.
[APPLAUSE]
Hey, everybody.
So we're back with Jerin
Arifa and Eve Ensler.
And yeah, Jerin, do
you wanna tell us
a little bit about your
work, and your thoughts
around how Muslim women fit
into the picture of feminism?
Yeah.
Yeah, well, I just
wanna start by saying
how honored I am to sit next to
Eve Ensler, one of my sheroes.
Well, I like to tell people
I have two jobs in marketing
to support my feminism habit.
And my feminism
habit includes being
on the board of the National
Organization for Women,
also being a convener for
the first Young Feminists
and Allies Virtual
Chapter of NOW,
which we're very excited about.
And some of my work, I
actually started my activism
in America, because of
"The Vagina Monologues,"
because of it V-Day.
So thank you.
So how did that happen?
You saw it somewhere,
and it inspired you?
Yeah, I went to Hunter
College, and they'd been
doing it for many, many years.
Hunter's very liberal.
And I decided to get involved
doing marketing for them.
And that's how I got involved.
What was the experience
of seeing it like for you?
What was the impact
that it had on you?
I think, like everybody
else, it's life changing.
I've had so many
male friends tell me
that it was life
changing for them,
that they really got
it after seeing it.
But what was the it for you?
For me, I think what it was,
was there were friends who were
involved in it who told me
that they were survivors,
because of the work I was doing.
But after watching the show,
and feeling that energy,
they stood up, and said
that they were survivors.
And that was such an important
step in their healing.
And so what was the path that
then let you down since then?
I actually have an
activist background because
of my mother and grandmother.
So it just helped
me get involved
with activism in America.
So then I became president of
the Hunter College Feminists
Club, and we did lots
of fun activists things,
including that I was
one of two students
to propose and help create the
CUNY-wide sexual assault policy
for half a million students.
Wow.
That's amazing.
She's incredible.
And Jerin has an amazing
voice, and a very articulate,
powerful, fierce, brave voice.
Last year, when we did
One Billion Rising,
we were looking at a lot of the
intersections around violence
against women, how it
impacts economic violence,
how racism, how Islamophobia.
And she wrote a really
brilliant piece on Islamophobia.
And you should talk about
that, because I think
it's really important
to put that forward
so we keep thinking about it.
Thank you.
So I think there's a
lot of Islamophobia
in American and beyond.
And some of it, as a Muslim
woman, I understand why.
What happened in 9/11
and the terrorist attacks
that have happened since
then have shaken all of us
to the core.
And I can understand how it's
human nature to react in anger,
and make this one
race as the other,
because then maybe we
can protect ourselves.
But the truth is, there's
more than a billion
Muslims in the world.
And if each one of
them were a terrorist,
we would be in a really
bad place right now.
Indeed.
And I think that also
translates into how
women are viewed, Muslim women.
They're viewed as very
passive, and abused,
and religious, the
women that are treated
the worst of any culture.
And Eve knows this
better than anybody
else-- that's just not true.
In America, every
nine seconds, a woman
is abused or sexually violated.
That's in America.
So to say one culture
is worse than another,
it doesn't help the
women of that culture.
It's really just others
that entire culture,
and it makes the women
from that culture
less likely to identify as
feminists, or to work with us.
Because they think, well,
they hate all of us.
Why would I wanna
work with them?
I think that's so true.
And I was reading an
article today about Delhi.
I was in Delhi at the
moment that Jyoti had been
murdered, like, right after.
It was an incredible
time to be--
Maybe tell people
what that story is.
Jyoti was a young woman who
got on the bus with her fiance,
and she ended up being horribly
gang-raped and murdered.
And the trial was
just this week,
and unfortunately, they've given
the death penalty to the people
who raped and murdered her.
I'm very opposed to
the death penalty.
But I was in India at the moment
when the whole case exploded.
And I was so moved to see
the response of Indians,
just the outpouring.
Every newspaper, every
magazine, every article
was about rape and
sexual violence.
To see an entire
country in uproar.
And so when I was
giving speeches,
I was like, this is the first
time I've ever seen this happen
in the history of the world
where violence against women
has been on the front
pages every single day.
I would love this to
happen in America.
And people got so angry at
me that I would actually
look to India for inspiration.
Heaven forbid America
would actually
look outside our
borders to be taught
something from other people.
But I think we end up demonizing
and otherizing groups so often.
People get categorized as
Muslim women, poor Muslim women,
African women, poor--
when in fact, violence
against women and
patriarchy happens
to be universal and epidemic.
There isn't any culture
or country I've been to,
and I've been to many.
Sorry.
I was gonna ask if you
see any, in that sense,
positive developments
over the last decade.
Are there indicators, or
trends, or statistics?
I mean, is it a flatline?
Is it a positive?
Is it a negative?
Is there any cultural
shift happening?
Well, here's the deal.
16 years ago, 30 years
ago, no one was talking
about violence against women.
It was just ordinary.
It was just what happened.
Well, Susan Brownmiller,
for instance.
Right, but that was
like 20 years ago.
More like 30, probably.
30.
Susan Brownmiller
was like, obviously,
the breakthrough book on
it. "Against Our Will"
was the breakthrough book.
But that was the beginning
of consciousness.
But 30 years ago, even that,
it wasn't widely thought about,
or talked about.
So we're at a point now where
it is now front page news, where
you have a Todd Aiken last
year, who comes out and talks
about legitimate rape or
illegitimate rape, or imagined,
and there's an immediate and
amazing response to that.
That wasn't happening
30 years ago, you know?
We know that more women
are reporting rapes.
We know that more people
are documenting rapes.
So it's hard to tell it
there's more rape happening
or if more people
are reporting it.
What hasn't changed
is patriarchy.
We have not undone the
constructs of patriarchy.
So I'm sure you have this
experience everywhere.
It just keeps repeating itself.
And what are some of the
main avenues to do that?
I was thinking about the
microfinance campaigns
that were seeking to
empower poor women.
Essentially, they
were the ones who
were getting most of the loans.
Do you see social trends or
ways that that empowerment
can accelerate?
Do you wanna answer that?
You can go ahead.
Well, I think
there's a lot of ways
that we're empowering women.
One is through voice,
and by telling stories,
and by trusting
their own experience,
and not cutting off their voice.
Someone earlier
was talking to me
about the fact that all their
lives they felt constricted.
They had no voice,
and what they felt,
and what they saw didn't matter,
and they were terrified to put
it into the world.
I think that's
definitely changing.
I think we see many more artists
coming forward, many more
women in positions of power.
And I think the internet has
really democratized opinions.
And women are having lots
of opinions on the internet.
I think also the more we look
at programs where women are
empowered economically, where
we're looking at just the whole
the military-industrial system
and how that is creating
a culture of violence
everywhere in the world,
I think those are incredibly
important factors.
And I think building
communities and movements
where women do not feel alone--
one of the things about One
Billion Rising is because
there was a world movement,
women in Mogadishu could rise,
because they were protected
by the global cone, right?
Women in Bangladesh could rise.
Women in Alabama could rise,
which is just as risky there.
And I think if we build
global communities,
women feel safe within
those communities,
because they're connected
to a bigger story.
And it's not just
their terrible culture.
It actually is
the world culture.
I was curious also-- I mean,
I was thinking about how,
yes, in the US,
maybe in Europe also,
there's a negative animus
around Islamic civilization,
Muslim culture.
That's probably
very unfortunate.
And I would say that
one aspect of that
is the sense that
in Islamic cultures,
women have less opportunity to--
That's actually
not true at all.
OK.
Tell me about that.
Islam, when it came
around, gave women rights,
like the right to
divorce, own property,
and do other things that
took Western nations
centuries to get to that point.
In the Quran, it gives
women so many rights.
It's patriarchy that has
taken that, and twisted it,
and said--
What are the rights that
it gives them, for example?
For example, in Afghanistan,
you know, Malala was shot,
because she was trying
to educate young girls.
In Islam, education and
learning is the same as prayer.
So these people who are
doing this violence,
not only are they bad
patriarchs, they're actually
very un-Islamic, because they're
trying to stop these women
from conducting prayer.
From your perspective, does it
makes sense, though, to refer
always back to the Quran?
Or in a way, I mean,
does an Islamic culture
have to develop to where that's
a reference point, but not
the reference point in a way?
I think it has
to be individual.
You know, I'm lucky where
I come from a family where
religion wasn't forced on me.
It was something I chose.
I think I chose to be
Muslim, because I found
it was so feminist, the Quran.
It was so empowering for me.
I've never heard that before.
It is so incredibly empowering.
All the rights that are
given to me by the Quran
are more than the American
government gives me.
Tell me more.
For example, there's
so many things
that are cultural
that are talked
about as if they're Islamic.
For example, female
genital mutilation,
nowhere to be found
in the religion,
but there are places
in Africa where--
But I was curious
more about the positive
rights that you feel are--
Absolutely, for example,
in Islam, every penny
a woman who earns
belongs to her.
Nobody else has
any right to that.
I choose to do whatever
I with my money.
Obviously, that's not reality
in a lot of Muslim cultures
because of patriarchy.
-Mhm.
So from your perspective, how do
you spread this understanding,
or make it more
generally understood?
I think it's about
education, but I
think it's also about what Eve
did with me, this little girl
from New York, giving
her voice in One
Billion Rising, to allow
Muslim women feminists
to tell her own stories.
I think it's so important.
I think so much that
happens in this culture,
people are speaking
for other people
rather than allowing people
to speak for themselves.
And one of things that we're
working on more and more
in V-Day, first of all
V-Day's owned by everybody,
so everybody's
having their voice.
But I feel like Jerin has taught
me so much about Muslim culture
that we didn't know.
And I think why aren't we
learning from each other?
We make all these assumptions
that just flat line experience
and close doors, rather
than saying, oh, talk to me.
Talk to me about your culture.
Tell me your interpretation,
or your experience
with your culture,
because everyone
has such different
experiences with culture.
You know, you go to
different Muslim countries,
and how the Quran is interpreted
is completely different.
You go to Pakistan,
it's one thing.
You go to Bangladesh,
it's completely different.
You go to Turkey,
it's one thing.
You go to wherever, it's
completely different.
And I think people's
experience in relationship
to religion colors so
much of what it is,
and how it's practiced.
And yet, we make all these
assumptions here that, I think,
got brought on
very much by 9/11,
and this desire to have this
monolithic experience which
froze Islamic
people in one place,
and Americans in another,
as if Muslim people
weren't Americans, you know?
Right.
And I think part of it is how
do you engender conversation?
We only have a couple more
minutes here together today,
and I was curious.
So in this campaign,
this worldwide campaign
that you're imagining, and
orchestrating, and bringing
into manifestation
against sexual violence,
what do you see would be
some milestones in the next 5
or 10 years ago?
Where would you like to
see it 10 years from now,
and how would you actually
get to that point?
Well, I think if we look
at last year and some
of the amazing results
of One Billion Rising,
we have seen laws change.
We've seen coalitions built.
And I think coalition-building--
we were talking
earlier about mind
shifts and evolutionary leaps.
I think part of what we've done
in organizing in resistance
is we've siloed things.
We put environmental
degradation over here,
and we put economic
injustice over here.
And we put Islamophobia
over here, and we put--
but in fact, there's one story.
We're all in one
story, and I think
the more we can build coalitions
where everybody's included
in the story, and everybody's
issues become integrated
and connected to
everybody else's issues,
the more possibility
there is for radical,
revolutionary transformation.
And I think One Billion Rising
is doing that organically.
And I don't really know how
dancing figures into it,
but there's something
about the act of dancing
that is liberatory.
It's so--
Even to Black Sabbath?
To anything.
You know, I think there is
a liberation of your body,
but there's also a
liberation of your mind.
And so you get out of your silo.
Your body is your silo, right?
So when you dance, you
break out of that silo,
and you begin to say, oh my god.
You're dancing too.
So what's your
connection to this?
And you're dancing.
You're 14.
What's your connection to this?
And then you begin to see
all these places where you're
rooted and
interconnected, and then
the movement gets enlarged,
and the energy gets enlarged.
And I was just looking
at the videos of women
in wheelchairs dancing, and
then cut to men just boogieing
in the middle of streets.
And then you're in the middle
of a desert, and there are--
What's the URL again for that?
-Onebillionrising.org
-Nice one.
Do you have any
last comment to add?
You know, the most
important reason Islam
is feminist is because
one of the main beliefs
is you can't fight with
the oneness of God,
meaning there's
only God above you.
And if I put a man
above me, that just
breaks down Islam completely.
Right on.
Thank you so much.
So beautiful to
talk to both of you.
I really appreciate it.
-Yeah, thank you.
[APPLAUSE]